# Compiling a LaTeX Document

LaTeX documents are generated
from a set of input files,
most importantly a set of
files ending in `.tex`.
For the majority of this
tutorial we will assume
your document resides mainly in
one `.tex` file.
A journal paper typically
uses BibTeX for references, which
add a `.bib` file, and figures.
Finally, journals will provide
formatting files specifying
how articles and bibliographies
should look in their journal.

The following content is a bit
thick, and a good thing to do
would be use this to create
a robust Makefile for LaTeX
and put it in this repository.

## latex v.s. pdflatex

There are two programs commonly used
to generate these documents,
`latex` and `pdflatex`.
`pdflatex` directly generates a PDF
file, which is usually what we're
aiming for.
`latex` generates a `.dvi` file, which
can then be converted to a PDF file
with `dvipdfm`.
The reason we would use `latex` is some
styles dictated by journals will compile
better with `latex` as opposed to `pdflatex`.
Both of these programs also output
other files described [below](## File Types).

Lets assume your document source is
in `amazing.tex`.
If you don't have any cross references
(uses of `\label` and `\ref`), then your
document will compile with a single command:

```
pdflatex amazing
```

If you do have cross references, you need
to run the compiler over the file twice.
The first pass will associate `\label`
names with actual numbers like Section 2.4,
and store that in a `.aux` file.
The second pass will replace every `\ref` command
with the right number from the `.aux` file.

```
pdflatex amazing
pdflatex amazing
```

## BibTeX

When using BibTeX, you have something like:

```
\bibliographystyle{plain}
\bibliography{works}
```

and a file named `works.bib`, replace `works` with
any name you like.
You will need to run the compilers even more.
First, an initial run to generate the `.aux` file,
which BibTeX needs.
Then actually run BibTeX, which will use the `.aux`
file and the `.bib` and `.bst` files to create
a `.bbl` file.
After that you run the LaTeX compiler as before,
as if your bibliography were done with
plain `\bibitem` lines:

```
pdflatex amazing
bibtex amazing
pdflatex amazing
pdflatex amazing
```

## File Types

[Here](http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/LaTeX/Basics#Ancillary_files)
is a really good guide to all the various files
output by the LaTeX compiler and what their purpose is.
So good, in fact, that we will replicate some of the
information here in two tables, for extensions that
are commonly seen.

First, the source files that actually affect the result,
these files should be tracked by Git and not deleted:

| Extension | Description                          |
|-----------|--------------------------------------|
|`.tex`     | LaTeX or TeX input file. It can be compiled with latex. |
|`.bib`     | Bibliography database file. (where you can store a list of full bibliographic citations) |
|`.cls`     | `\documentclass` files define what your document looks like, often given by journal. |
|`.sty`     | `\usepackage` LaTeX Macro package. |
|`.bst`     | `\bibliographystyle` BiBTeX style file. |

Second, the files generated by running the various tools:

| Extension | Description                          |
|-----------|--------------------------------------|
|`.aux`     | Transports information from one compiler run to the next, including cross-references. |
|`.bbl`     | Bibliography file output by BibTeX and used by LaTeX (contains generated `\bibitem` lines) |
|`.blg`     | BibTeX log file. (BibTeX errors are logged here) |
|`.spl`     | Additional information for BibTeX |
|`.dvi`     | Device Independent File resulting from `latex` |
|`.pdf`     | Portable Document Format resulting from `pdflatex` or `dvipdfm` |
|`.log`     | Gives a detailed account of what happened during the last `latex` run |
|`.out`     | hyperref package file, contains URL and cross-reference info |
|`.toc`     | Stores all section headers. Used by next `latex` run to produce the table of contents. |
